Hello,
everyone.
In this lesson,
we will cover the Lennox File Editor and editor is a program which enables you to create
and manipulate data or text Analytics fall.
There are several standard Texan editors available on most Lennix systems.
You could use V i e d e x e Max PICO and women,
which is a van.
Them is the advanced version of the I.
In our lesson,
we will focus on V I.
Why?
Because V I is available in almost every Linux distribution,
regardless of which Olynyk system you log in it.
Whether it's a bun to Soucy Red Santo s,
you're gonna find me I everywhere.
Plus,
it's very easy to learn.
The V I editor actually supplies commands for inserting or deleting text,
replacing text,
moving around the file,
finding substitutes,
strings and cutting and pasting text inside.
So that's what we I does when you have to write to a file,
the most common keys are I,
which is to concert escape,
replace before our Defense league and quit without saving and quit.
Right,
but safe.
So let's look at our Lennox machine,
and at this time you will log into our Lennox machine the Linux virtual machine through our
police station.
Okay,
um,
that cd my and wished Eritrea in in this derek tree,
I want you to create your first file.
So call it the I,
which is a command space.
Uh,
my first added to her or just save my first.
Well,
how's that?
Much easier hit.
Enter now.
When you hit enter,
you are still in command mode.
You're not an insert mode,
so there are two different modes.
Once you are in the V,
I his first more is to when you run the command.
Second mode is when you inside of the V I,
and you start typing it.
If you want to get out of that typing mode,
you have this escape.
So now let's start.
Let's see if I want to type into this file.
You hit I or insert lower case I As soon as you hit I you see at the bottom it say's insert
.
It means we are an insert mode now.
Already limits commands won't work are because we are an insert,
more so that he could type something like Hello world.
This is my first lesson to learn,
be I and you could hit.
Enter again,
um,
so excited about.
So it's just simple as if you're trying award document now if you wanted to exit out off it
.
If you want to save this wall,
all you have to do is hit escape right here.
And once you hit escape,
you'll see the insert mode is calm.
Now how do you save this file?
You could do through two different ways.
One.
You hit shift is easy,
the twice,
and it will save the file.
Let's see if you do cat again and do my first file,
you'll see it's there another way to save a far.
Let's go back in the file,
my first ball and let's say you want type something,
um,
hit insert again and then high space.
And now you want to exit out and save his escape.
And this time,
instead of shipped,
is easy.
You type shift calling,
right.
Quit and exclamation point,
which is also referred to as bag you had.
How do you wear file?
You read the father my first file,
and there you go.
The file is there.
So this is these are two modes is once you get out And once you get in now,
I want you to go back into your fault and it be I and my first file,
and I want you to replace,
um hi.
No,
I want you to delete high and leave their as is now.
How do you go?
Move around inside off the file.
And you're already India editor.
You could use up bottom left,
right keys on your keyboard to move around.
But remember,
you cannot use thes keys if you are an insert mode.
So let's say if you are hit I and you know in insert more and now you do a left right key.
It can work,
but it most likely it will break your command.
So it's better you had escaped and go back and then you do d on your keyboard d This will
delete the entire line I wanted to delete on Lee the Ford High.
So how do I get back?
My last line that I deleted.
So you hit you just simple you and it brings back your last line.
Now,
if you wanted to remove the high just type X once which will remove one character Type X
again was to remove another character.
Now you have a space hit X again.
Now you don't have a space Now what?
If you want to save now again,
do shift ZZ twice and it saves it.
How do you wear a fight?
You do,
cat my 1st 5 And it is there.
Now let's go back in again.
And let's practice the replace command the I my first Well,
I wanted to replace.
I am so excited about it.
I wanted to replace the word excited with the word happy.
So how do we do it?
We cannot hit I right now because we don't want to get into the insert mode.
So we will use our arrow keys to go down to the word excited so I could do our once I hit
our I could do h It only replaced one letter if I wanted to do again.
The second letter You move your cursor to the right it are and then do a and so forth.
But I would prefer that you do escape out of it and then do x x x expects and then you hit
I and then PP why you escape again.
So you can move around,
You could go up.
It could go it down If you want to move around now,
if What If you want to go to the end of this file and now you want to create a new line
right below it before I am so happy about it.
You had Oh,
this will create a new line for you.
And also,
it would automatically put you into insert mode so you could type anything like LA Law.
The law?
Well,
you just noticed that you just type j by mistake.
Now,
how do you remove Jay?
You type X,
Remember,
If you're gonna type X,
it will write X instead of deleting it.
Look,
See it typing the X So I want to delete that character.
How do I delete that,
captain is because you cannot delete why?
Because you are in insert mold.
How do I get out of insert more You hit?
You're saving life saving key which is escape as soon as you hit escape.
You see,
the insert mode is gone.
Now when you hit x x,
it deletes those two characters that you added by mistake.
It was a typo that you added Same way.
If you want to go up,
you could if you wanted to write something right here.
And if you type,
I you notice it.
Start writing right in the middle.
Hello.
Hi C without giving a space.
So let's do escape again.
His ex Move the cursor to the left and x Okay.
And now you have that space in the middle.
Now,
how do I write?
By putting a space in the middle?
I do a so able automatically advance to the next space.
So hello.
Hi.
By space world.
Okay.
Now you still insert more.
What?
If you want to save it before you save it again,
get out off Uncertain.
More beheading escape and do shift z z this safe cure while cat My first,
uh,
and it is saving your first file now.
What if I wanted to delete the line blah,
blah,
blah the third line.
So I'll go back into my file,
be I my first file.
Move your cursor down to blah,
blah,
blah and hit d d twice.
12 They It removes the line that you added that wherever you want to go,
if you want to.
Oh,
usual Moved it by mistake.
No problem that you will bring it back again.
You could save it through ships.
Easy for you could save it through common right,
Quit and bank.
You could hit and and that's how you saved the ball.
Now let's go back into the fall one more time.
The I might first file and I want to.
Let's say I have a file which is huge,
and I wanted to search for a Pacific word in a file.
Let's say I wanted to search for a lesson.
I wanted to search for l so you could do search for it two ways.
I hope you remember the command corrupt.
And then you search for lesson from where my first file and it will Onley bring that one
line that has the word lesson.
But if you are in the eye mode,
you could also do that same search.
And now you could just simply make sure you're not an insert mode.
Simply hit slash and type L E s s on lesson it into and there it will bring you to exactly
the word that you want to change.
Perhaps.
Are you looking for so These are the few commands that we have about creating a file using
the I.
We do have many different commands or keys that we could use in V I I have included in this
lecture.
I have included all those keys in and Azan Handout.
So please look into those and try every single key.
I really want you to be very familiar with this and become eventually become an exporter
venue typing in something in your text fall.
You know exactly which key you're gonna work into or which exactly key you gonna use.
Ah,
one common mistake that everybody is gonna make is when you are an insert mode,
you're probably gonna have to get out of it.
You can.
You typing ex this and that.
But you cannot.
So your lifesaver is You do colon.
No.
First Sorry.
First his escape.
Colon que Now this time don't write w the w will write your changes.
The file.
You don't want to make change it.
So just to quit cold and quit bang,
hit,
enter verify it.
They go See now you don't have that garbage that you were gonna write your file into.
So this is another way.
You get out and change your father.
So please practice man also give you different options to use it.
There's again.
There's another editor if you like to use,
which is them which,
um,
Anat vast version off the I.
You could use that to,
which is also available.
Most of the links distribution,
whichever you like,
But please do practice practice as much as you can.
And I will recommend that you create files many files in your home directories or within
your subdirectories creature files and write whatever you want to ABC or write a story or
whatever and change your text.
This is this is gonna allow you to practice v i editor.